Den Danske Vitruvius I-II (English: The Danish Vitruvius I-II) is a richly illustrated 18th-century
architectural work on Danish monumental buildings of the period, written by
the Danish Baroque architect Lauritz de Thurah.

It was commissioned by Christian V in 1735 and published in two volumes between 1746 and 1749.
The title refers to the Roman architect and engineer Vitruvius, who published De architectura in the 1st century AD,
an authoritative treatise on the architecture of the time. The direct inspiration for de Thurah's Den Danske
Vitruvius was Colen Campbell's Vitruvius Britannicus.

With its numerous illustrations, Den Danske Vitruvius is a valuable source of information on the many Danish
buildings of the mid-18th century, which have since been demolished, rebuilt or lost in fires.

A facsimile edition published in 1966-67 includes a third volume, based on an until then
unpublished manuscript kept at the Royal Danish Library. It covers buildings completed later than 1749.

History

Lauritz de Thurah had a military education and was a self-taught architect who learned much of what he knew by
studying the inspiring buildings he saw on his travels outside Denmark between 1729 and 1731.
His architectural writings can be seen as a natural continuation of this interest.

In 1735 de Thurah received a royal grant to collect information and to write a comprehensive
work on architecture in Denmark, detailing all the royal buildings in the country.

It appeared between 1746 and 1749, published at the King's expense, and printed by the best Danish
printer at that time, Ernst Henrich Berling.

Contents

Den Danske Vitruvius provides a richly illustrated documentation of monumental Danish buildings of the period.
Like Campbell's work, it is not a treatise in the empirical vein but basically a cateloque of designs.
Descriptions are short and text appears in Danish, French, and German in parallel columns.

First volume, with 121 plates, covers the most important buildings in Copenhagen within
all categories, down to two burgouis houses at Kongens Nytorv. The second volume has 161 plates and covers
all royal palaces and other buildings of note in the rest of Denmark.

Buildings are shown in plan, section and elevation as well as many bird's-eye perspective.
All prospects are drawn by Johan Jacob Bruun. Many of the plates were executed by Michael Keyl and C.L. Wüst,
two German engravers who were commissioned by Thurah especially for the project.